# Habit Tracker

### Introduction
The project is a simple, easy-to-use daily planner with a focus on helping users to improve their daily productivity. With a minimalistic interface, users add tasks to their daily planner and tick them off when they are completed. Each day's results are recorded and can be queried at any time for a variety of useful statistics.

We all know how hard it is to stick to any habit and especially one that is challenging or unfamiliar. It is all too common to experience a few days of good progress before dropping the ball and ending up in the same place as where we started. I believe that this is at least in part down to the focus on being perfect every day where instead we should be aiming to slowly get results and build up the kind of consistency that leads to long term success. This belief is reflected in the design of the app with statistics generated for the user presenting the progress in comparison to previous days. By highlighting the little improvements in a user's productivity, the app is able to provide small burst of motivation that encourage them to persist and build a better version of themseles over time.

### Technologies used
#### React
On the frontend, I have opted for the React library. React allows developers to build up complex user applications using smaller “components”. That makes the development process simpler to debug due to the separation and reusability of components.

#### Express
Used on backend servers to listen on a port and handle requests flowing from the client. This technology makes it simple to route incoming http requests to the correct handler and to send back the necessary responses. Express allows for effortless scaling up to handle the many backend routes of a quickly growing application.

#### MongoDB
Is a NoSQL database that is very well suited to the cloud computing model. “MongoDB’s scale-out architecture, which distributes work across many smaller (and cheaper) computers, means that you can create an application that will handle spikes in traffic as your business grows” [1] (MongoDB, 2021). This fits well with the requirements of my application which needs to be able to scale with increasing user demand.


### App Features
#### Microservices 
My project uses a microservice architecture which containerizes the client, server and database within using docker-compose. Additionally, I have achieved this architecture by completing separating the backend server from the client-side application visible to the users.

#### Client Application 
For the client, I have a React application which defines the user interface/interaction. This client 
application sends requests to the backend server such as posting user information or retrieving data. These requests are authenticated using JSON web tokens [2] generated by the server. It is capable of displaying the information it receives from the backend and processing it into useful visuals for users.

#### Server 
The backend server for this application is responsible for correctly handling requests from the client, liaising with the database and performing the most complicated computations for the app. When a request is received from the client on the correct port, it is first sent to the Express library where it is routed to a function(s) and the response is then processed. 

#### Client-Server Interaction
As an example, when a user makes a get request to the route “/stats”, express will send the request to a function that will determine if the time period the user has requested is valid and whether the authentication token is attached. If the request is invalid in some way, express will send back an error code as a response. If it is valid, the database will be queried, and the information found curated and sent back in a useful format for display.

#### Server-Database Communication
Upon initialisation of the server, the connection between NodeJS and MongoDB is established using the mongoose driver when the client makes a request, it will be routed, and the server may perform queries on the database to fetch user data.
